# What is this? _(redux)_
### May 9, 2021

This is an attempt to explore the solution space around the creation of an extremely high performance, functional reactive, cross-platform user interface development and deployment tool set.

There are a handful of questions that I would like to answer here:

* Is it possible to create rich, immersive, responsive experiences that operate beautifully on **all** of the things?

* Can we create a GUI environment that is actually testable?

* How is it that games have uncovered such unbelievably impressive performance capabilities, while our applications almost always hog memory, hog CPU and still run like a tire fire on even the most capable machines?

* What would it feel like to take some of the development paradigms of high end games and bring them to application development?

How is it that games have uncovered such unbelievably impressive performance capabilities, while our applications almost always hog memory, hog CPU and still run like a tire fire on even the most capable machines?

## Random Thoughts, Hopes, Views, Rants and Intuitions

### In 1990, we had about 1 million transistors on a chip, in 2020, we had 50 _BILLION_, our applications are not 50,000x faster (or easier to build)

Our applications _must_ get better at taking advantage of the compute resources that have emerged.

Specifically, we need to:

* Leverage mulitple CPU cores
* Leverage GPUs whenever they're available
* Stop abusing RAM as if it's infinite
* Make automated testing easy and default
* Get the hell out of people's way

### Object-oriented GUI architecture has reached a non-optimal local maxima

Building a typical GUI application necessarily requires the creation of a very wide and deep tree of incredibly complex state.

In most existing architectures, this tree is kept around in memory over relatively long periods of time and the state that is stored in various nodes must be meticulously (but it is usually incorrectly) manipulated by application logic.

This leads to enormous amounts of boilerplate code and applications that cannot ever be placed under any kind of reasonable, repeatable test environment, much less launched across a variety of operating systems.

Most GUI frameworks focus on OO principles with data protection patterns that make it impossible to instantiate application code outside the context of the actual (and brutally slow) rendering environment, which is part of why testing is so difficult.

### Browser based applications almost always perform horribly

For evidence, see: Slack. QED.

Even with the most experienced and highly resourced teams, building (and evolving over time) a high performance application on these platforms is so difficult, that it might as well be impossible.

Browsers have evolved to become incredibly complex and highly resource instensive operating systems of their own.

They do the best job they can of delivering application-like functionality, even though they were explicitly designed as a document platform.

Web browsers today have an enormous memory footprint, even in the best of cases, but for most applications, this baseline is even blown out of the water before we even get down to CPU usage (which is almost always even more depressing).

The OO-based GUI toolkit, single-threaded runtime and overall weight of even simple pages make browsers non-ideal for delivering performance intensive workloads on top-end devices, much less mobile (or embedded) devices with even fewer resources.

To be clear, this is not a critique of any group, individual or browser vendor, it's clear that this is an incredibly difficult problem and we haven't figured out the optimal perspective(s) to solve it (yet).

It's my hope that this exploration will contribute to unlocking some capabilities that have so far, remained elusive.

### Functional, reactive component descriptions are far more rational, composable and testable than their declarative (and especially OO) cousins

React introduced the world to a pure-ish, functional paradigm for GUI component development that is incredibly powerful and has numerous benefits.

Treating a graphical interface as if it were a simple, linear transformation of application data into presentation elements massively reduces cognitive overhead and introduces opportunities for much simpler testing regimes and incredible performance gains.

That said, React itself has not delivered (IMO) on most of the promise that it's core insight provides, especially in terms of testability and even moreso in terms of performance. This is due in part to the building blocks that React relies on in the browser, but also because of some poor decisions in the library itself (e.g., unnecessary reliance on global state and brutally slow test infrastructure).

It's possible that we may see massive gains by taking this approach deeper into the internals of a graphical application and composing up from there. Specifically, what will happen if we replace the stateful OO tree with pure functions all the way down?

### Composition
One of the things that's most appealing about functional component descriptions, is how beautifully they compose without the compromises involved with inheritance schemes.

An application might call this function with:
```c
int message_cancelled(signal_t *s, node_t *btn) {
  app_message_box_t *m = beam_get_userdata(btn);
  m->submitted = false;
  m->show_message_box = false;
}

int message_submitted(signal_t *s, node_t *btn) {
  app_message_box_t *m = beam_get_userdata(btn);
  m->submitted = true;
  m->show_message_box = false;
}

node_t *my_message_box(app_message_box_t *m) {
  return vbox(
    children(
      h1(m->title),
      p(m->message),
      hbox(
        children(
          button(label("Cancel"), on_clicked(&message_cancelled), userdata(m))
          button(label("Submit"), on_clicked(&message_submitted), userdata(m))
        )
      )
    )
  );
}

node_t my_app_main(void) {
  app_message_box_t *m = {
      .title = "My Message Box";
      .message = "Here is some content";
      .submitted = false;
      .show_message_box = true;
  };
  
  node_t *message_box = my_message_box(m);
  
  return vbox(
    children(
      // section content.
      message_box;
    )
  )
}
```

