# Signals
### May 9-12, 2021

I have a thing that I'm pretty sure I need to build, but every time I sit down to write up a 
description of this thing, I become a little less certain. So here goes. Let's at least put some 
of the thoughts down tonight.

Events. Notifications. Handlers. Callbacks.

Here's the thing. Every single OO UI system has a base object, and that base object is some kind 
of event dispatcher, or publisher, or signal source, or whatever it's called. This feature let's 
consumers of the API (1) handle user input in the nearest scope, (2) handle arbitrary changes to 
component states and (3) handle external, system state mutations.

It seemed obvious that this system needed something to fill the same purpose(s).

But does it?

To be clear, this system doesn't have "UI Controls." There is no notion of a long-lived object 
sitting in memory somewhere with its state changing to and fro. Item 2 is not a requirement.

_This UI is constructed every single frame as a linear transformation of the data that is being 
projected._

There are no UI controls and there is no internal component state to notify anyone about. [There 
is no spoon.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ajPElu42BH4)

Even if we eventually do some caching and comparing for performance reasons, one should imagine
that is what's happening.

The application author _does_ need to know about user gestures and/or external system devices (e.
g., mouse, touch, keyboard, gamepad), and this might look a lot like event handlers, but there's 
something subtly different about these messages. They aren't necessarily reflections of changing 
component state, so much as they're a stream of notifications that might include a related 
component description.

Let's look at an example.

This example approximates events in GTK (and just about every other OO UI system too).

This is a very preliminary example of a button with one kind of signal handler:
```c
#include <stdio.h>

typedef struct {
  char *foo;
}my_data_t;

/**
 * Define a click handler for the button signal.
 */
static int button_clicked(node_t *n) {
  my_data_t *d = n->userdata;
  // Button clicked name: abcd-button label: Hello userdata: Hello
  printf("Button clicked name: %s label: %s userdata: %s\n",
         beam_get_name(n),
         beam_get_label(n),
         d->foo
         );
  beam_mark_dirty(n);
  return 0;
}

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
  printf("Button Click Demo\n");
  my_data_t *data = {
      .foo = "Hello";
  };
  
  // Create a new button
  node_t *b = button(
    name("abcd-button"),
    label(data->foo), // Render the user data
    userdata(data),
    signal("clicked", &button_clicked)
  )
      
  // Trigger a synthetic click signal on the button instance
  beam_signal_emit(b, "clicked");
  // Free the resources for the element
  beam_free(b);
  
  return 0;
}

```
In this scenario, the author has the ability to assign a handler to a named signal on a given 
entity. The runtime engine will transform user gestures into engine signals, associate that 
gesture with a given element and call the callback at some point in time (before the next frame).

One thing to keep in mind, is that this notification needs to happen *before* the next frame is 
processed, because that `node_t` entity is likely to be discarded in just a few milliseconds. 
Whatever the author wishes to do in that handler, it better be (a) fast and (b) have nothing to do 
with directly mutating a tree that's already been rendered and is about to be discarded.

This seems fine in a button click scenario, I can imagine something simple like, mutate 
the model and let the engine know it has work to do on some subset of the tree (as above).

I can also imagine stuffing a bit of work into some queue or buffer that's got a handful of 
worker threads draining it. These workers could be doing all kinds of expensive things that 
eventually make their way back as mutations to the main application model, which make their way
into the next projection on the next frame.
```c
static int button_clicked(node_t *n) {
  my_worker_queue_push("start-something", n->userdata);
  return 0;
}
```

The idea is that with OO UI toolkits, there's this bubbling feature that can be super helpful in 
keeping deeper (more general purpose) components from knowing anything about thier context in a 
more specific, aggregation of components.  But the bubbling messages allow the parent or 
grandparent or whomever up the tree to respond and manage broader state changes or take other 
actions as needed.

## Other Ideas?

This is pretty typical, but it's also a little odd in this relatively stateless component
environment. The temptation to mutate the component is going to be huge, and the efficacy of
mutating whatever your handler receives will be nil, as it's about to be discarded.

There's a thing I like to do with OO UI Component systems. I start by building out a bunch of 
raw components, then I wrap those up into a new application entity and give that a name and a 
new, higher level event stream. For example, UI Control Buttons might emit `CLICKED` events, but 
my custom aggregation might emit `PRODUCT_SELECTED` events. Then, some parent or grandparent in 
the tree might collect all of these higher level events and begin mutating models or fetching 
data, or whatever.

I'd like to make this super simple and declarative if possible.

Maybe something like:

```c
node_t *create_section(my_item_t *section) {
  signal_handler_t *handler = signal_reemit_as("section-selected", section));
  return button(
    label(section->title),
    signal("clicked", handler)
  );
}

node_t *my_aggregation(my_app_t *app) {
  int count = app->section_count;
  node_t **sections[count] = {0};
  for (int i = 0; i < count; i++) {
    sections[i] = create_section(sections[i]);
  }
   
  return vbox(children_list(count, sections));
}
```
_*Please ignore for a moment that I just leaked some sweet, sweet memory._

## Tradeoff Warning
Rather than having a massive, nested, implicit, _hidden_ tree of long-lived components 
that are being mutated behind the scenes by spooky action at a distance, this library is 
going to require application authors to create and manage a tree that is essentially a presentation
model, or in other words, a union of their application data and some quantity of component(s)
state(s).

I can't tell yet if I will experience this as unbelievably powerful, or insanely complicated. 

## Summary
The truth is that in legacy systems, if there is a visual component on screen, it's generally 
reflecting some application concept, and someone had to project that concept into that component 
at some earlier point in time, and then _also_ manage that component's changing state over time 
through a series of event handlers and usually deep chains of component selectors. Both of which 
tend to be leaky, brittle and overly complicated.

I think this could be a better way of doing it.

This system will give application authors the ability to be notified _in context_ whenever a user 
gesture (i.e., click, touch, etc), system message (i.e., window resize, close request, etc.) or
external device update (i.e., usb device connected/disconnected) takes place in relation to a 
visual element they have projected.







